They say a good compromise
leaves everyone unhappy.
Well, that's not
really an option
if you're a hostage negotiator.
Fortunately, there
are some tricks
to getting what you really want.
And as you're about
to see, those tricks
can be used in
all walks of life.
MALE SPEAKER: Ever try
to negotiate a good deal
on a car or a home?
Or maybe you've wanted to
ask your boss for a raise.
Having been the FBIs leading
international kidnapping
negotiator and working over
150 cases from the Middle East
to Haiti, Chris Voss
knows a thing or two
about the art of negotiating.
In his book "Never
Split the Difference,"
Chris teaches you
how to negotiate
as if your life depended on it.
So whether you're
trying to make a sale
or talk to your
troublesome teenager,
Chris wants to show you how
to use world class negotiation
skills that give you the
competitive advantage
in any discussion.
Chris Voss is here with us now.
And Chris, welcome
to our program
it's so good to
have you here today.
Thank you very much.
It's my pleasure.
Let's talk, if
we can, about what
happened in the last several
hours-- couple of days.
Here was a guy who
was a terrorist
and his goal was to kill
as many people as possible.
So what level of
negotiating do you
have with someone like that?
If that's their end goal,
how do you deal with that?
Well this is two things.
It was a tactical
empathy that we
used as a-- in
hostage negotiation,
which actually applies to
everything is first of all,
understand what somebody
is really after.
And then at what point in
time you've encountered them,
a guy like this is
actually on what's
called the killing journey.
And every single time that
we prepared, we had to-- what
if we had caught that guy a
block away from the night club?
What would we have said to him?
If for some reason we had gotten
a few seconds to talk to him,
even the slightest moment,
wherever I can get an edge,
wherever I can get an advantage.
Understanding the
adversary is not
the same as agreeing with them.
And when you begin to
make that distinction,
you find that you
can talk to anybody.
If they'll talk back, and
once they start talking you've
got leverage.
Well, our government has
sort of a longstanding policy
that we don't negotiate
with terrorists.
But you don't necessarily
think that's wise.
Well, you know, actually
there's a nuance to the policy
that a lot of people don't
understand because it's
complicated to explain, but
we don't make concessions
to terrorists-- that's
what the policy says.
Because we look-- I
used to always say,
when I used to brief
the White House,
I'd say, we don't
negotiate with terrorists,
we negotiate against them.
So we begin to use
negotiation as a way
to get what you want
without compromising.
One of the things that
you talk about utilizing
is something you
call mirror words.
Talk about that a little bit.
Talk about that a little bit?
So what we do is we
do what I just did.
I mirror the person
I'm talking with.
That was well done. [LAUGHTER]
And it made you want to
talk with me, didn't it?
I mean, what you feel like
that is you want to open up--
TERRY MEEUWSEN (VOICEOVER):
I'm listening to you.
---you want to extend
the conversation,
it connects us even more.
So I try to connect
us even more.
And it also helps you think,
and it expands your thought
processes, and it
gives both of us
a moment to move forward
together collaboratively.
You know, sometimes
very often, in fact,
the people who are perpetrators
of these kind of acts
have mental issues.
So do things like mirror words,
and some of the other tactics
that you talk about,
work with someone
who's delusional or suffering
from mental incapacity?
Well everybody has patterns.
It doesn't matter who you
are, you've got patterns.
And the crazier that
they are, they're
crazy because we don't
like their patterns.
But it's my job as a negotiator
under any circumstance
to be able to figure
out your patterns
and then to work with that.
TERRY MEEUWSEN (VOICEOVER):
To kind of define them.
Right.
It's a little creepy,
it's kind of like you
got to go inside somebody's
head and start thinking
like that a little bit.
Well you compartmentalize
and again,
if you can make the distinction
that understanding is not
agreement, there is
tremendous power in that.
Yeah.
You say that the
word no is something
you're working toward in a
negotiation with someone,
what do you mean by that?
Well no is protection.
Yes is commitment.
When you say yes, you commit
yourself to something,
you begin to immediately
worry about what
you've gotten yourself into.
TERRY MEEUWSEN
(VOICEOVER): Yeah.
Can I fulfill what
I've promised here?
Exactly.
And so-- but when people say
no, they center themselves,
they feel protected.
You know, it's little
things like-- and everybody
that works for me,
nobody ever says,
when they call
somebody on the phone,
have you got a few
minutes to talk?
Because you wonder
what you let yourself--
what you let yourself in for.
Everybody that
works for me says,
is now a bad time to talk?
Yeah.
I like that. [LAUGHTER] I
like that, I might use that.
Please do.
You also talk about
the word compromise,
that compromise isn't
necessarily a good word,
though we think of it as such.
Right.
TERRY MEEUWSEN (VOICEOVER):
Talk a little about that.
Well there's a difference
between a high value trade
and whether or
not we compromise.
And compromise
most of the time is
like, you know when I
came in this morning,
if I wasn't sure whether
or not I should wear
black shoes or brown
shoes I compromised and I
wore one black and one brown.
So that's what compromise is.
And actually, I
probably should have
done that, I would
have caught you
off guard if I were to wear
two different color shoes.
We don't want to hold
your feet to the fire.
But, you know, compromise
is usually short cut.
Because I don't know
what to do and you end up
with two solutions that
don't work well together.
So what's the
alternative to that?
What do you-- what
would you prefer?
Well let's talk a little
bit more about what you have
that you could give me
that is really worthwhile
and let's make a
high value trade.
I spoke to a Bar Association
in Memphis one time,
and my fees can be high.
But they said-- they
had a magazine and said,
we'll put you on the
cover of the magazine.
Now that costs them
nothing and it's
a rare thing for me to get.
And it was a perfect
trade-off and they got me
in there for a much reduced
fee because of how much
valuable-- how much
value they gave to me.
Black swans, what are they?
The things that you never guess
that make a huge difference.
In every negotiation, you're
keeping stuff from me,
you're hiding cards.
TERRY MEEUWSEN (VOICEOVER):
Like the nugget
that you're looking for.
Right.
And the black swan is really
where those unknowns overlap.
And what we need to do is
I need to get you talking.
I need to mirror you, I
need to paraphrase you,
I need to summarize you.
And I need you to look at
me and say that's right.
And at that point
in time, you'll
probably say something
that you had no idea
was really important to me.
And I'll go like, holy cow
that makes all the difference
in the world.
What's the most
difficult negotiation
you've ever been in?
Well when people
stop talking entirely,
if the other side won't talk at
all, that's the most difficult.
And there have been different
times when we actually
learned to negotiate
through the media
because we couldn't get the
other side to talk with us.
But we knew they were paying
attention to the media
and so we put something
out in the media
and we'd influence them
and they wouldn't know it.
So you say body
language is important.
In what way?
Well, you know, body
language probably
constitutes about
anywhere from 75% to 95%
of your reaction from
me to figure out.
Now the fascinating thing
is if you are negotiating
with several parties, you want
to watch the body language
of people that aren't speaking.
Because everybody-- the talker
knows everybody's attention
is on the talker, so
the people on their side
that are listening,
they don't think
they're watch-- that
you're watching them.
And so when their talker says
something that they don't like,
you don't-- they'll make all
sorts of shifts in their chair
because they'll think
nobody's looking at them.
And those are really the people
watching the negotiations.
So I think the big
question probably
everybody is wanting
to know is how do you
ask your boss for a raise?
You look at your boss and you
say, do you want me to fail?
You'll be stunned at what
people are willing to say no to.
TERRY MEEUWSEN
(VOICEOVER): Really?
Absolutely stunned.
And your boss will
say, of course,
of course I don't
want you to fail.
And then you'll say,
well in order for me
to do what you want me to do,
how am I supposed to do it
unless I get these things.
And that opens up
the conversation.
What you've also
just done there is
you made what you want a
path to what they want.
If you want me to be
successful for you then how can
I do it unless I
get these things.
And that's a conditional
how question and there's
great power in how.
TERRY MEEUWSEN
(VOICEOVER): There is.
There's great power in how.
There's great power in
what you share in the book.
I just want to say,
these are great insights.
The book is called "Never
Split the Difference,"
negotiating as is if
your life depended on it.
The author is Chris Voss.
It's available nationwide.
Thank you so much.
Thank you for having me in.
Great wisdom.
Fascinating background
that you have.
Thank you.